<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
    <title>Appendix 1: Glossary of Key Terms - Framing Jesus</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/style.css"/>
    <style>
        :root {
            --primary-color: #5c6ac4;
            --secondary-color: #e53e3e;
            --accent-color: #f6ad55;
            --text-color: #2d3748;
            --background-color: #f7fafc;
            --callout-bg: #edf2f7;
        }
        body {
            font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
            line-height: 1.6;
            color: var(--text-color);
            background-color: #ffffff;
            padding: 0;
            margin: 0;
        }
        .chapter-card {
            background: #ffffff;
            border-radius: 0;
            box-shadow: none;
            padding: 2.5rem 2rem 2rem 2rem;
            margin: 2rem 0;
            max-width: 800px;
            margin-left: auto;
            margin-right: auto;
        }
        h1 {
            text-align: center;
        }
        .container {
            width: 100%;
            max-width: 800px;
            margin: 0 auto;
            padding: 1rem;
        }
        h1 {
            color: #5c6ac4;
            font-size: 2.2rem;
            font-weight: bold;
            margin-bottom: 1.5rem;
        }
        .navigation {
            display: flex;
            justify-content: space-between;
            margin: 2rem 0;
            padding: 1rem;
            background-color: var(--callout-bg);
            border-radius: 0.5rem;
        }
        .nav-link {
            color: var(--primary-color);
            text-decoration: none;
            font-weight: bold;
        }
        .nav-link:hover {
            text-decoration: underline;
        }
        .glossary-list {
            margin-top: 2rem;
        }
        .glossary-term {
            font-weight: bold;
            color: var(--primary-color);
        }
        .glossary-definition {
            margin-bottom: 1.5rem;
        }
    </style>
</head>
<body>
<body>
<div class="container mx-auto px-4">
<div class="chapter-card">
<h1>Appendix 1: Glossary of Key Terms</h1>
<div class="glossary-list">
<div class="glossary-term">Adoption Christology</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The theological view that Jesus became the Son of God at a specific moment (typically his baptism) rather than being eternally divine; supported by early manuscript variants of Luke 3:22 containing "Today I have begotten you."</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Arian Controversy</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The 4th-century theological dispute initiated by Arius of Alexandria, who taught that Jesus was created by God and thus not co-eternal with the Father; the controversy led to the Council of Nicaea in 325 CE.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Cappadocian Fathers</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Gregory of Nyssa, Basil the Great, and Gregory of Nazianzus, whose philosophical formulation of Trinity doctrine (one ousia, three hypostases) became orthodox teaching in the late 4th century.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Christology</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The theological study of Jesus's nature and identity; often categorized as "high" (emphasizing divine attributes) or "low" (emphasizing human attributes).</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Codex Bezae</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Important 5th-century manuscript (designated as "D") containing the Gospels and Acts with significant variant readings, including the "Today I have begotten you" baptismal declaration in Luke 3:22.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Exaltation Christology</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The earliest Christian view that Jesus became divine only after his resurrection when God exalted him to divine status, preserved in early sermons in Acts and Romans 1:4.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Father-Creator Formula</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The theological formulation present in early Christian writings where the Father alone is identified as Creator of the universe, with Jesus as distinct agent; found in Acts 4:24 and Irenaeus's lost quotation from Luke.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Gematria</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Hebrew numerological system assigning numerical values to letters; relevant to Matthew's genealogy where the numerical value of "David" (14) appears to structure the generational count.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Homoousios</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Greek term meaning "of the same substance," used at the Council of Nicaea to define Jesus's relationship to the Father; contrasted with homoiousios ("of similar substance").</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Hypostasis</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Greek philosophical term used by Trinitarian theologians to denote a "person" within the Godhead; Trinitarian formula defined God as three hypostases sharing one ousia (essence).</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Incarnation Christology</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The view that Jesus existed as divine before his birth and became incarnate in human form; most fully developed in John's Gospel with its Logos (Word) theology.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Jewish Monotheism</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The strict belief in one indivisible God that formed the theological foundation of Judaism; referenced by Jesus in Mark 12:29-30 (the Shema) but explicitly rejected by Gregory of Nyssa as inadequate.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Logos</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Greek term meaning "word" or "reason"; in John's Gospel, identifies the pre-existent Christ who was "with God" and "was God" from the beginning.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Marcion of Sinope</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Second-century theologian who rejected the Hebrew Bible and its God, creating an edited canon featuring Luke's Gospel and Paul's letters with passages about the Creator removed.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Modalism</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Also called Sabellianism or Patripassianism; the belief that Father, Son, and Spirit are different modes or manifestations of one God rather than distinct persons.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Nicene Creed</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Formulation of Christian belief established at the Council of Nicaea (325 CE) and expanded at Constantinople (381 CE), defining Jesus as "begotten not made, of the same substance with the Father."</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Ousia</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Greek philosophical term meaning "essence" or "substance"; in Trinitarian theology, refers to the single divine nature shared by Father, Son, and Spirit.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Patristic Quotation</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Citations of scripture by Church Fathers that often preserve variant readings not found in surviving manuscripts; crucial evidence for textual reconstruction.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Syriac Sinaiticus</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Important manuscript discovered in 1892 by Agnes Smith Lewis at Saint Catherine's Monastery; contains early versions of the Gospels including Matthew's genealogy with "Joseph begat Jesus."</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Textual Variant</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Different wordings of the same passage across manuscripts; can reveal theological development through scribal alterations.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Trinitarian Theology</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Doctrine that God exists as three co-equal, co-eternal persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) sharing one divine essence; formalized in the 4th century.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Virgin Birth Narrative</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Accounts in Matthew 1-2 and Luke 1-2 describing Jesus's conception through the Holy Spirit without human father; absent from Mark and John's Gospels and showing signs of later addition.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Western Text-Type</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">Family of New Testament manuscripts characterized by distinctive readings, including several discussed in this book such as the baptismal declaration in Luke 3:22.</div>
<div class="glossary-term">Zerubbabel Gap</div>
<div class="glossary-definition">The numerical discrepancy between Matthew and Luke's genealogies, where Luke counts 18 generations from Zerubbabel to Jesus while Matthew counts only 9, demonstrating mathematical impossibility.</div>
</div>
</div>

</div>
<footer class="py-8 text-center text-gray-600 mt-12 border-t border-gray-200">
<p style="text-align:center;">Copyright © 2025 | "Framing Jesus — How Ancient Scribal Changes Elevated Jesus Beyond our Reach"</p>
</footer>
</body>
</body>
</html>